Run Offense vs Air Force Grant Ross is the Mike McCray of Air Force [gazette.com] Air Force has long sought to make up for size deficiencies with a blizzard of different alignments and blitzes.
Ace's FFFF post covered Air Force's approach already: Base Set? Air Force lists themselves as a 3-4 but this is really a 3-3-5, what with the 263-pound nose tackle and 205-pound outside linebacker.
He's listed at 5'11" and probably a bit shorter than that, and while he has a certain slippery quality he is not an explosive athlete. He is efficient in the offense and good at taking the opportunities in front of him. Air Force's average offensive "percentile performance"—an opponent adjusted "how good did you do" metric—went from 45% under Romine to 73% under Worthman. Worthman's ability on the ground is a part of that; so too is his ability to get the ball to the correct person, something that does not show up in a box score. Unfortunately-named Tim McVey is the other returning threat. McVey was the most explosive Air Force back a year ago, averaging 8.5 yards a carry as the guy getting the pitch when defenses fail to defend it. Ace: His approach is simple but effective: run fast in a straight line. Michigan's outside linebackers and safeties will be tasked with accounting for McVey on the edge. One bad angle or missed assignment and they'll get hit with a chunk gain. He's the guy who punishes you when you screw up. KEY MATCHUP: OPTION STUFF vs DEFENDING OPTION STUFF. The success or failure of the Air Force offense is not just based on "assignment football" but also tactical factors. Option design will shift over the course of the game as Air Force sees Michigan's system and runs versions of their plays designed to defeat it. Michigan must stick and move; the multiple fronts and coverages they've shown so far bode well, as long as they're able to get their head around their assignments in each. Air Force is appropriately the most air-oriented of the academies, but they're still very light on passing attempts. last year they averaged 11.5 attempts per game, and those dropped after Worthman emerged as a starter. He had 39 attempts in his 6 starts, barely over 6 per game. He completed 59% of those for 14(!) yards an attempt. This will all be hauntingly familiar to Michigan fans still nervous about the 2012 game. Worthman had 12 attempts in the VMI ham-blasting, completing eight and maintaining that 14 YPA. This VMI highlight reel starts out with a few of those attempts: Worthman is short and has a long throwing motion but if able to set in the pocket he's pretty accurate. McVey was the top receiver with three catches and will likely stay that involved. Air Force lost potential mid-round draft pick Jalen Robinette and his 35 catches; McVey and tight end Ryan Reffitt tied for second with eight. The outside guys are entirely new. Sophomore Geraud Sanders is a big guy at 6'3", 210, and claimed a Northwestern offer and some Iowa interest a couple years back.
Fear/Paranoia Level: 3 (Baseline 5; +1 for Thanks, Dave, +1 for Worthman Changes Their Equation, +1 for Oh God Flexbone Time, –1 for Replacing That Many Starters Isn't Easy Even If You're Air Force, –1 for Oh Look We Run A 3-3-5 Now, –1 for And Devin Bush Doesn't Get Flanked Easily, –1 for Reassuringly Large Spread, –1 for BEEF MACHINES.) Desperate need to win level: 10 (Baseline 5; +1 for Let's Not Have Dave Revenge From Beyond The Grave Thanks, +1 for Losing To An Academy Team Is Not Something Real Good Teams Do, +1 for Losing A Four-Score Spread Feels Bad Man, +1 for And I Know That From Personal Experience I Would Not Like To Repeat, +1 for Deflating The Don Brown Legend Is Bad).
Air Force is going to struggle to stay in contact against Michigan receivers; they will struggle to stay on the line of scrimmage against Michigan linemen.
