Laura Ingraham returned from Easter break defiant, saying an advertiser revolt that stripped her Fox News show of half its sponsors was a result of “bullies on the left” and “left-wing retaliatory hit squads” that were trying to silence conservatives.

But SNL’s Kate McKinnon, playing Ingraham on the show’s “Weekend Update” segment, painted the beleaguered host as mostly unfazed by the uproar surrounding her costly online feud with Parkland, Fla., shooting survivor David Hogg. It was good to be back, McKinnon-as-Ingraham said, “after that planned vacation” that “was so fun and so planned and so scheduled a long time ago.”

More than enough new sponsors are champing at the bit to support “The Ingraham Angle,” she said, listing them, one by one:

Carl’s Sr.: “Leftover Carl’s Jr. Food ground to mush for old people.”
Lady Bump Stock: “The lightweight bump stocks for delicate hands.”
Reverse mortgage: “We’ll take that house now.”
Malaysian Airlines: “Caught in a scandal and need an escape? Malaysian Airlines.”
Cream soda: “The soda for whites. You got the white one, baby.”
“Ingraham” also touted Shkreli’s Jelly, named after “Pharma Bro” and Turing Pharmaceuticals CEO Martin Shkreli, who was roasted after he raised the price of a potentially lifesaving medication from $13.50 a pill to $750. Shkreli’s Jelly, “Ingraham” said, is “just jelly that’s $8,000 a jar.” Shkreli was convicted last year of defrauding his investors of $10 million and sentenced to seven years in prison.


The skit underscored the trouble Ingraham’s show faced. In February, it was the fourth-most-popular cable news show, drawing in about 2.6 million total viewers, according to Adweek. That was the show’s highest monthly rating since it launched in October.

Fox News advertisers face pressure to quit. Again.
Teen activist David Hogg is calling for a boycott of Laura Ingraham’s advertisers. It’s not the first time Fox News sponsors have faced pressure. (Elyse Samuels/The Washington Post)

In March, Ingraham mocked Hogg’s public comments about getting rejection letters from colleges. He responded by calling for a boycott of her show, and Ingraham lost more than a dozen advertisers, including Johnson & Johnson, Nestlé, Hulu, Jenny Craig, Ruby Tuesday and Miracle-Ear.

If you’re going to promote values, @Gillette, then you should stop being one of the main advertisers for Laura Ingraham’s show. https://twitter.com/gillette/status/979442069117825026 …

The following message was issued earlier today to employees of Liberty Mutual Insurance by David Long, Chairman and CEO:

Any student should be proud of a 4.2 GPA —incl. @DavidHogg111.  On reflection, in the spirit of Holy Week, I apologize for any upset or hurt my tweet caused him or any of the brave victims of Parkland. For the record, I believe my show was the first to feature David...(1/2)

Fox News has defended Ingraham. During Ingraham’s vacation, Jack Abernethy, co-president of Fox News, said in a statement: “We cannot and will not allow voices to be censored by agenda-driven intimidation efforts. We look forward to having Laura Ingraham back hosting her program next Monday when she returns from spring vacation with her children.”

McKinnon’s version of Ingraham had similar thoughts.

“The totalitarian left can attack me all they want,” she said. “But I will continue to defend the First Amendment. That’s my right to bully people without being bullied in return.”

She also made a pitch to listeners.

“Don’t boycott my show. Our country’s so divided right now, and I’m an important part of that. Let’s move on. You know I’m going to say something worse. Why don’t you just watch the show and find out what that’s going to be.”


Fox News’s Laura Ingraham and David Hogg, a student survivor of the Feb. 14 shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla. (J. Scott Applewhite, left, and Rich Schultz/AP)